I2P: add support for transient addresses for outbound connections (#25355)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/i2p.md

     Ignored if -i2psam is not set. Listening for incoming I2P
     connections is done through the SAM proxy, not by binding to a
     local address and port (default: 1)

-i2ptransientout
     Generate a transient, one-time I2P address for ourselves when making
     I2P outbound connection and discard it once the connection is
     closed. Does not affect the address for accepting incoming I2P

>      connections which is persistent. Ignored if -i2psam is not set.

Reviewer: In line with the suggestion in `src/init.cpp`
```diff
-     Generate a transient, one-time I2P address for ourselves when making
-     I2P outbound connection and discard it once the connection is
-     closed. Does not affect the address for accepting incoming I2P
-     connections which is persistent. Ignored if -i2psam is not set.
+     Announce a new, transient I2P address to each outbound I2P connection
+     (default: 1). The address for accepting incoming I2P connections
+     is unaffected and persistent. This option is ignored if -i2psam
+     is not set.
```

Author: Done (some of it).

bitcoind -i2psam=127.0.0.1:7656
```

The first time Bitcoin Core connects to the I2P router, if

> `-i2pacceptincoming=1`, then it will automatically generate a persistent I2P

Reviewer 2: should we specify here what is default?

Author: On one hand that would be useful, on the other hand if the source code is changed and this forgotten, they would go out of sync.

This PR has 4 ACKs. Should I open a followup PR with this change after this PR is merged or leave it as is?

Reviewer 2: You are right, this is certainly an insufficient reason to invalidate 4 acks.

address and its corresponding private key. The private key will be saved in a
file named `i2p_private_key` in the Bitcoin Core data directory. The persistent
I2P address is used for accepting incoming connections and for making outgoing
connections if `-i2pacceptincoming=1`. If `-i2pacceptincoming=0` then only
outbound I2P connections are made and a different transient I2P address is used
for each connection to improve privacy.

## Persistent vs transient I2P addresses

In I2P connections, the connection receiver sees the I2P address of the
connection initiator. This is unlike the Tor network where the recipient does
not know who is connecting to them and can't tell if two connections are from
the same peer or not.

> If an I2P node is not accepting incoming connections, then Bitcoin Core uses

Reviewer 2: Not sure I'm reading it correctly. What if it does accept incoming connections? Why don't do transient too?

Author: Yes, I guess, you are reading it correctly :)

> What if it does accept incoming connections?

Then for outbound it will use its persistent address.

> Why don't do transient for outbound still?

That is a good question and a subtle one. In earlier incarnations of this PR we did that, but then @mzumsande shot it down :gun:, pointing out that we would self-advertise our persistent address over the outbound connection that uses a transient one, defeating the purpose of using a transient address. OTOH if we do not self-advertise anything, then listening would be in vain because nobody would know our listening (persistent) address because we never told it to anybody. See https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25355#discussion_r933617054 for the whole discussion.

Bitcoin Core data directory. A persistent I2P address is used for accepting
incoming connections (`-i2pacceptincoming`) and for making outgoing connections
if `-i2ptransientout` is not used.

## Persistent vs transient I2P addresses

In I2P connections, the connection receiver sees the I2P address of the
connection initiator. This is unlike the Tor network where the recipient does
not know who is connecting to them, not even the initiator's Tor address.

Even if an I2P node is not accepting incoming connections, it is known to other
nodes by its outgoing I2P address. If this address is always the same, then
there is an opportunity to whitelist a given node. However, this also creates an
opportunity to discriminate, fingerprint or analyze a given node based on its
I2P address.

For this reason, the `-i2ptransientout` configuration option creates a new,
transient (disposable) I2P address for each new outbound connection. The address
will never be reused, not even if reconnecting to the same peer later.

`-i2ptransientout` only affects addresses for outgoing connections and not the
address for accepting incoming connections (if `-i2pacceptincoming` is given).

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Author: Good point! That behavior would be surprising and documenting it is sub-optimal. Better don't advertise our persistent address over I2P outgoing connections that use transient addresses. I extended the commit `net: create a transient I2P session if -i2ptransientout is given` with the following diff to achieve that:

<details>
<summary>[patch] don't self-advertise</summary>

```diff
diff --git a/src/net_processing.cpp b/src/net_processing.cpp
index 74d1bf44d2..17c67ae7a5 100644
--- a/src/net_processing.cpp
+++ b/src/net_processing.cpp
@@ -2773,12 +2773,32 @@ void PeerManagerImpl::ProcessBlock(CNode& node, const std::shared_ptr<const CBlo
     } else {
         LOCK(cs_main);
         mapBlockSource.erase(block->GetHash());
     }
 }
 
+/**
+ * Decide if we should send our own address to a given peer as a self-advertisement.
+ * We do the self-advertisement:
+ * - initially after establishing the connection and
+ * - periodically every ~24h (AVG_LOCAL_ADDRESS_BROADCAST_INTERVAL).
+ */
+static bool ShouldSelfAdvertiseTo(const CNode& node)
+{
+    if (!fListen) {
+        return false;
+    }
+
+    // Don't self-advertise if this is an I2P outbound connection and -i2ptransientout=1.
+    // If we do so, then we would self-advertise our persistent I2P address, used for
+    // accepting incoming connections, which would defeat the purpose of using transient
+    // addresses for outgoing connections.
+    return !node.addrBind.IsI2P() || node.IsInboundConn() ||
+           !gArgs.GetBoolArg("-i2ptransientout", DEFAULT_I2P_TRANSIENT_OUT);
+}
+
 void PeerManagerImpl::ProcessMessage(CNode& pfrom, const std::string& msg_type, CDataStream& vRecv,
                                      const std::chrono::microseconds time_received,
                                      const std::atomic<bool>& interruptMsgProc)
 {
     LogPrint(BCLog::NET, "received: %s (%u bytes) peer=%d\n", SanitizeString(msg_type), vRecv.size(), pfrom.GetId());
 
@@ -2924,14 +2944,14 @@ void PeerManagerImpl::ProcessMessage(CNode& pfrom, const std::string& msg_type,
             // empty and no one will know who we are, so these mechanisms are
             // important to help us connect to the network.
             //
             // We skip this for block-relay-only peers. We want to avoid
             // potentially leaking addr information and we do not want to
             // indicate to the peer that we will participate in addr relay.
-            if (fListen && !m_chainman.ActiveChainstate().IsInitialBlockDownload())
-            {
+            if (ShouldSelfAdvertiseTo(pfrom) && !m_chainman.ActiveChainstate().IsInitialBlockDownload()) {
+
                 CAddress addr{GetLocalAddress(pfrom.addr), peer->m_our_services, (uint32_t)GetAdjustedTime()};
                 FastRandomContext insecure_rand;
                 if (addr.IsRoutable())
                 {
                     LogPrint(BCLog::NET, "ProcessMessages: advertising address %s\n", addr.ToString());
                     PushAddress(*peer, addr, insecure_rand);
@@ -4670,13 +4690,13 @@ void PeerManagerImpl::MaybeSendAddr(CNode& node, Peer& peer, std::chrono::micros
 {
     // Nothing to do for non-address-relay peers
     if (!peer.m_addr_relay_enabled) return;
 
     LOCK(peer.m_addr_send_times_mutex);
     // Periodically advertise our local address to the peer.
-    if (fListen && !m_chainman.ActiveChainstate().IsInitialBlockDownload() &&
+    if (ShouldSelfAdvertiseTo(node) && !m_chainman.ActiveChainstate().IsInitialBlockDownload() &&
         peer.m_next_local_addr_send < current_time) {
         // If we've sent before, clear the bloom filter for the peer, so that our
         // self-announcement will actually go out.
         // This might be unnecessary if the bloom filter has already rolled
         // over since our last self-announcement, but there is only a small
         // bandwidth cost that we can incur by doing this (which happens
```
</details>

Since this PR had two ACKs without the above, let me know if it is ok or if I should remove it (@jonatack, @mzumsande).

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Reviewer 3: This seems problematic to me: A new node with `-i2pacceptincoming=1` (that doesn't change the default `-i2ptransientout` value) will have a hard time getting inbound peers if it only self-advertises to inbound peers, but only receive inbound peers once it has successfully self-advertised.

Maybe it makes sense to instead soft-set `-i2ptransientout` to false if `-i2pacceptincoming` was chosen? Or, alternatively, just document this behavior, because, as you wrote above, "a node that wants to avoid this should not be listening."

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Author: A node could self-advertise its I2P address to an IPv4 peer if it only listens on I2P. However, if it also listens on IPv4 then it would prefer its IPv4 address. I guess that for the discussion here we should assume that I2P addresses get self-advertised only (mostly) over I2P connections.

From what you have pointed out it seems that `-i2pacceptincoming=1` is kind of incompatible with `-i2ptransientout=1` because if both are set, then:

* if we self-advertise our persistent address in outgoing I2P connections, then that is very easy to detect and the same as `-i2ptransientout=0` wrt privacy
* if we don't self-advertise in outgoing I2P connections then nobody is going to learn our listening I2P address and we will not get incoming connections, like `-i2pacceptincoming=0`

In current code we have `-i2pacceptincoming` default to `1`. Assuming we don't want to change that, then maybe introduce `-i2ptransientout` with a default of `0` and hard fail the startup if both are explicitly/manually set to `1` by the user? And flip `-i2ptransientout` to `1` if `-i2pacceptincoming` is switched off by the user?

How does this work for Tor? From what I read in the code, if a node is listening on a Tor service, then it would self-advertise its listening Tor address in outbound Tor connections. So, "the Tor peer does not know who is connecting to them" is not true in this case - the peer knows the connecting node's Tor address (which is persistent).

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Reviewer 3: > From what you have pointed out it seems that `-i2pacceptincoming=1` is kind of incompatible with `-i2ptransientout=1` 

Yes, I think that's correct.

> In current code we have `-i2pacceptincoming` default to `1`. Assuming we don't want to change that, then maybe introduce `-i2ptransientout` with a default of `0` and hard fail the startup if both are explicitly/manually set to `1` by the user? And flip `-i2ptransientout` to `1` if `-i2pacceptincoming` is switched off by the user?

That looks sensible to me. 

As an alternative thought, I wonder if we would lose much if we'd instead tie the creation of transient addresses to `-i2pacceptincoming=0` and not introduce a `-i2ptransientout` option at all. That would make things much simpler, but we wouldn't support the use case of `-i2pacceptincoming=0`, `-i2ptransientout=0` anymore (so that potential peers couldn't  whitelist our permanent address). But is there a lot utility in whitelisting i2p peers like that? I'm asking because if out peer doesn't know who we are, they don't really have a reason to whitelist us, and if they actually do know us, why would we need to connect to them via i2p in the first place?

> How does this work for Tor? From what I read in the code, if a node is listening on a Tor service, then it would self-advertise its listening Tor address in outbound Tor connections. So, "the Tor peer does not know who is connecting to them" is not true in this case - the peer knows the connecting node's Tor address (which is persistent).

That looks right, although I didn't test it. But I think that if you want to have Tor inbound connections, it is not unreasonable to assume that you might want to let the network (including your outbound peers) know about that.

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Author: > As an alternative thought...

That sounds even better to me. I like _not_ adding new options :) Use transient addresses if `-i2pacceptincoming=0`, simple. That would make it work similar to Tor - if we are listening then we reveal our (Tor or I2P) address to the peers we connect to (outbound).

As for the downside of not being able to whitelist if `-i2pacceptincoming=0` (and thus transient addresses are being used), that can be done later if https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17167 gets in, and/or use the persistent address for making outbound connections to nodes given to `-addnode=` or `-connect=` even if transient ones are being used for other outbound connections (due to `-i2pacceptincoming=0`).

Makes sense?

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Reviewer 3: > Makes sense?

Yes, I also like that option best! (and the transient address behavior could then be mentioned in the  `-i2pacceptincoming` RPC help).

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Reviewer: On initial read this SGTM, sensible defaults and not adding the configuration option would also be my preference. Will re-review with this discussion in mind.

> The address for accepting connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and

Author: Done!

Just to answer that one:

> if they actually do know us, why would we need to connect to them via i2p in the first place?

Because we may want to hide the fact that Bitcoin nodes are running on either machine. Also, for the added encryption and authentication based on the I2P address' private key. For example, white-listing IPv4 addresses could be dangerous because, if spoofed, you may end up white-listing a malicious actor who has "taken" that IPv4 address. This is not possible with I2P. To spoof an I2P address one would have to steal the private key from the owner's machine.

bitcoind -i2psam=127.0.0.1:7656
```

The first time Bitcoin Core connects to the I2P router, if a persistent I2P
address is to be used, then it (and its corresponding private key) will be
automatically generated and saved in a file named `i2p_private_key` in the
Bitcoin Core data directory. A persistent I2P address is used for accepting
incoming connections (`-i2pacceptincoming`) and for making outgoing connections
if `-i2ptransientout` is not used.

## Persistent vs transient I2P addresses

In I2P connections, the connection receiver sees the I2P address of the
connection initiator. This is unlike the Tor network where the recipient does
not know who is connecting to them, not even the initiator's Tor address.

Even if an I2P node is not accepting incoming connections, it is known to other
nodes by its outgoing I2P address. If this address is always the same, then

> there is an opportunity to white-list a give node. However, this also creates an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is an opportunity to whitelist a given node. However, this also creates an
```

----

Would suggest shortening this and avoiding repeating "a given node" with:

```
Even if an I2P node does not accept incoming connections, it is known to other
nodes by its outgoing I2P address. If this address is always the same when it
connects to other nodes, this creates an opportunity to discriminate,
fingerprint or analyze it based on its I2P address.
```

Author: Took the suggestion, but left the "whitelist" text.

opportunity to discriminate, fingerprint or analyze a given node based on its
I2P address.

For this reason, the `-i2ptransientout` configuration option generates and

> uses a new, transient (disposable) I2P address for each new outbound connection.

Reviewer: maybe s/generates and uses/creates/

Author: Done.

The address will never be reused, not even if reconnecting to the same peer
later.

`-i2ptransientout` only affects addresses for outgoing connections and not the
address for accepting incoming connections (if `-i2pacceptincoming` is given).
This is because the address for accepting connections is advertised to the
Bitcoin network and it takes time for it to propagate and be known by other

> nodes. So, it does not make sense to change it often - it must be persistent.

Reviewer: Don't begin a sentence with "This is because..." (suggest dropping it: "The address...")

Idem for "So, ..." (suggest dropping)

An [emdash](https://www.thepunctuationguide.com/em-dash.html) (" — " or " --- ") should be used here, not a hyphen. An emdash can optionally be set off with spaces.

```suggestion
nodes. It does not make sense to change it often — it must be persistent.
```

Author: Done, changed the minus to em-_and_ :laughing:

bitcoind -i2psam=127.0.0.1:7656
```

The first time Bitcoin Core connects to the I2P router, if a persistent I2P
address is to be used, then it (and its corresponding private key) will be
automatically generated and saved in a file named `i2p_private_key` in the
Bitcoin Core data directory. A persistent I2P address is used for accepting
incoming connections (`-i2pacceptincoming`) and for making outgoing connections
if `-i2ptransientout` is not used.

## Persistent vs transient I2P addresses

In I2P connections, the host that receives the connection knows the I2P address
of the connection initiator. This is unlike the Tor network where the recipient
does not know who is connecting to them, not even the initiator's Tor address.

So, even if an I2P node is not accepting incoming connections, they are known
to other nodes by their outgoing I2P address. This creates an opportunity to
white-list given nodes or treat them differently based on their I2P address.
However, this also creates an opportunity to fingerprint or analyze a given node
because it always uses the same I2P address when it connects to other nodes. If

> this is undesirable, then a node operator can use `-i2ptransientout` to generate

Author: Oh, well, it is also possible to analyze a node by connecting to it. That is kind of unavoidable and a node that wants to avoid this should not be listening.

a transient (disposable), one-time I2P address for each new outgoing connection.
That address is never going to be reused again, not even if reconnecting to the
same peer later.

`-i2ptransientout` only affects addresses for outgoing connections and not the
address for accepting incoming connections (if `-i2pacceptincoming` is given).
This is because the address for accepting connections is advertised to the
Bitcoin network and it takes time for it to propagate and be known by other

> nodes. So, it does not make sense to change it often - it must be persistent.

Reviewer 4: How often can this be changed if a user wants to do it?

Author: It is hard to give a concrete answer but it could be _days_ before one's address is well propagated through the network.

You can measure for yourself in your environment: delete `~/.bitcoin/i2p_private_key` and restart `bitcoind` - it will generate a fresh I2P address for listening. Then monitor the incoming connections with something like `bitcoin-cli getpeerinfo |jq 'map(select(.network == "i2p" and .inbound)) |length'` or by enabling `-debug=net` and grepping `debug.log` for something like `connection from.*i2p accepted`.

> nodes. So, it does not make sense to change it often - it must be persistent.

Reviewer: suggestions

```diff
-In I2P connections, the host that receives the connection knows the I2P address
-of the connection initiator. This is unlike the Tor network where the recipient
-does not know who is connecting to them, not even the initiator's Tor address.
-
-So, even if an I2P node is not accepting incoming connections, they are known
-to other nodes by their outgoing I2P address. This creates an opportunity to
-white-list given nodes or treat them differently based on their I2P address.
-However, this also creates an opportunity to fingerprint or analyze a given node
-because it always uses the same I2P address when it connects to other nodes. If
-this is undesirable, then a node operator can use `-i2ptransientout` to generate
-a transient (disposable), one-time I2P address for each new outgoing connection.
-That address is never going to be reused again, not even if reconnecting to the
-same peer later.
-
-`-i2ptransientout` only affects addresses for outgoing connections and not the
-address for accepting incoming connections (if `-i2pacceptincoming` is given).
-This is because the address for accepting connections is advertised to the
-Bitcoin network and it takes time for it to propagate and be known by other
-nodes. So, it does not make sense to change it often - it must be persistent.
+With I2P connections, the connection receiver sees the I2P address of the
+connection initiator, unlike the Tor network where the receiver does
+not know who is connecting to them, not even the initiator's Tor address.
+
+Even if an I2P node does not accept incoming connections, it is known to other
+nodes by its outgoing I2P address. If this address is always the same when it
+connects to other nodes, this creates an opportunity to discriminate,
+fingerprint or analyze it based on its I2P address.
+
+For this reason, the `-i2ptransientout` configuration option generates and
+announces a new, transient I2P address for each new outbound connection. The
+address will never be reused, not even if reconnecting to the same peer later.
+
+`-i2ptransientout` only affects addresses announced to outbound connections and
+not the address for accepting inbound connections (provided that
+`-i2pacceptincoming` is on).  This is done because the address for accepting
+connections is advertised to the Bitcoin network and it takes time for it to
+propagate and be known by other nodes. It does not make sense to change it
+often -- it must be persistent.
```

Author: Took some of this.
